Clarify when the PTO may need to be recomputed and reset (#3665)
quicwg/base-drafts: draft-ietf-quic-recovery.md

immediately.

A sender recomputes and may need to reset its PTO timer every time an
ack-eliciting packet is sent or acknowledged, when the handshake is confirmed,
or when Initial or Handshake keys are discarded. This ensures the PTO is always
set based on the latest RTT information and for the last sent packet in the
correct packet number space.

When ack-eliciting packets are in-flight in multiple packet number spaces,

> the timer MUST be set for the packet number space with the earliest timeout,
> except for ApplicationData, which MUST be ignored until the handshake completes;
> see Section 4.1.1 of {{QUIC-TLS}}.  Not arming the PTO for ApplicationData

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the timer MUST be set for the packet number space with the earliest timeout,
with one exception. The ApplicationData packet number space (Section 4.1.1
of {{QUIC-TLS}}) MUST be ignored until the handshake completes. Not arming
the PTO for ApplicationData
```

prevents a client from retransmitting a 0-RTT packet on a PTO expiration before
confirming that the server is able to decrypt 0-RTT packets, and prevents a
server from sending a 1-RTT packet on a PTO expiration before it has the keys
to process an acknowledgement.

When a PTO timer expires, the PTO backoff MUST be increased, resulting in the
PTO period being set to twice its current value. The PTO backoff is reset upon

> receiving an acknowledgement unless it's a client unsure if the server has

Reviewer 2: The subject of the "it" is a little unclear here.

Perhaps instead:

> The PTO backoff is reset when receiving an acknowledgment, except when a client receives an acknowledgment from a server prior to the server validating the client address.  A client MUST keep increasing the PTO count until <insert clear conditions here>.

Author: SG, I tried to rework this with your suggestion.

> receiving an acknowledgement unless it's a client unsure if the the server has

Reviewer 3: s/the the/the

validated the client's address. Not resetting the backoff during peer address

> validation ensures the client's anti-deadlock timer is not set too aggressively

Reviewer 2: This is the first use of anti-deadlock in the draft.  I think that you are just referring to the PTO timer that we set unconditionally on the client prior to address validation.

It might be better to keep all the rules about setting the "PTO timer" at the client prior to address validation in the one paragraph/section rather than scattering them about like this.  Then you can say "except at the client prior to address validation; see {{...}}".

immediately.

A sender recomputes and may need to reset its PTO timer every time an
ack-eliciting packet is sent or acknowledged, when the handshake is confirmed,
or when Initial or Handshake keys are discarded. This ensures the PTO is always
set based on the latest RTT information and for the last sent packet in the
correct packet number space.

When ack-eliciting packets in multiple packet number spaces are in flight,
the timer MUST be set for the packet number space with the earliest timeout,
with one exception. The ApplicationData packet number space (Section 4.1.1
of {{QUIC-TLS}}) MUST be ignored until the handshake completes. Not arming
the PTO for ApplicationData prevents a client from retransmitting a 0-RTT
packet on a PTO expiration before confirming that the server is able to
decrypt 0-RTT packets, and prevents a server from sending a 1-RTT packet on
a PTO expiration before it has the keys to process an acknowledgement.

When a PTO timer expires, the PTO backoff MUST be increased, resulting in the

> PTO period being set to twice its current value. The PTO backoff is reset upon
> receiving an acknowledgement, except when a client receives an acknowledgment
> from a server prior to the server validating the client address. A client
> keeps increasing the PTO backoff until the server's address validation
> completes to ensure the client's PTO timer is not set too aggressively
> when the server is slow in responding with handshake data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PTO period being set to twice its current value. The PTO backoff factor is reset
when an acknowledgement is received, except in the following case. A server
might take longer to respond to packets during the handshake than otherwise.
To protect such a server from repeated client probes, the PTO backoff is not
reset at a client that is not yet certain that the server has finished validating
the client's address. That is, a client does not reset the PTO backoff factor on
receiving acknowledgements until it receives a HANDSHAKE_DONE frame or
an acknowledgement for one of its Handshake or 1-RTT packets.
```

Reviewer 2: use "handshake confirmed" for the last piece.

Author: An ACK of a Handshake packet isn't handshake confirmed, unfortunately.

Reviewer 2: But that's fine.  This doesn't need to more aggressive than confirmation.
